# DrowsinessDetect
Driver drowsiness is one of the major causes of traffic accidents. This report surveys the literature on driver drowsiness detection and classifies the existing methods into three groups: the driving pattern-based method, the biological signal feature-based methods and vision-based methods. However, monitoring the driving pattern of the vehicle only applied to limited number of cases where the road condition and driver quality is great, and biological signal feature-based methods cannot be easily applied for real-world applications. Computer vision methods become popular in this field and both statistical models and deep neural network models work well on this drowsiness detection problem. 

There are few open-source datasets specifically targeted on driver drowsiness and the existing dataset for driver drowsiness contains not only video data but also the ECG/ECG biological signals which are not useful in this project. Therefore, I used my custom collected data in this project. The state-of-art computer vision solution for drowsiness detection includes deep learning method like fast RCNN. Because of the relatively small size of my dataset, only light-weighted statistical learning models are tried in this project.

My baseline is a rule-based method in which I set a threshold for the number of consecutive frames where the driver's eye aspect ratio is below a constant value. Based on the rule-based method, I extracted features of blinking rate, the closure degree of eyes, the maximum time of eye closure, yawns in the collected videos and manually labeled the video clips with ‘Drowsy’ and ‘Conscious’. Those features were used to train an SVM with a radial basis function kernel and the model achieved an accuracy of 90.1640% and an F1-Score of 89.5073% which outperformed the baseline.

Those eye features and mouth features were obtained based on the HOG + Linear SVM face detector and the facial landmark detector created from an ensemble of regression trees trained from the pixel intensity.

In order to make the model more robust, more data is needed to make the dataset more balanced and more features could be tested. We could verify the performance of model in different situations (e.g. different lighting conditions) and have more subjects conduct the experiment.
